% -*-texinfo-*-
\input texinfo

@c %**start of header
@setfilename faq.info
@settitle Frequently Asked Questions
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c
@c $Id: faq.texinfo,v 1.1.1.1 2001/07/06 09:08:04 pcj Exp $
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2001 Paul Cody Johnston - pcj@inxar.org
@c
@c This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
@c your option) any later version.
@c
@c This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
@c WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
@c Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307,
@c USA.  
@c

@ifinfo
This is the STT FAQ.

Copyright @copyright{} 2001 Paul Cody Johnston, inxar.org.
@end ifinfo


@titlepage
@title Syntacs Translation Toolkit FAQ

@author Paul Cody Johnston

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill
@end titlepage

@node Top, HowCompile, (dir), (dir)

This is the STT FAQ.

@menu
* HowCompile::                  
* WhatProperties::              
* HowWriteSTT::                 
@end menu

@c =====================================================================
 

@node HowCompile, WhatProperties, Top, Top
@chapter How do I compile a grammar?

!!This FAQ is far too early to be of much use!!

The simplest way is to use the @file{sttc} script in the @file{bin/}
directory.  Pass the filename of the grammar to the script.

@example
[syntacs-x_x_x]$ bin/sttc ../grammar/scc/scc.stt
[syntacs-x_x_x]$ bin/sttc ../grammar/abb/abb.xml
@end example

The @file{sttc} script calls the @code{main} method of the
@code{com.inxar.syntacs.Compile} class, so you can just call it directly:

@example
[home]$ java -classpath lib/jenesis.jar:lib/syntacs.jar:lib/xml.jar:xerces.jar \
         com.inxar.syntacs.Compile \
         grammar/scc/scc.stt
@end example

@node WhatProperties, HowWriteSTT, HowCompile, Top
@chapter What are properties?

Properties are @dfn{key = value} pairs that are used to customize and/or
affect the behavior of various classes.  For example,
@code{verbose=true} triggers verbose output, and
@code{compile-viz-dpa-hide-loopback-edges=true} prevents the drawing of
@dfn{loopback} edges when rendering an LALR1 pushdown automaton.  There
is a list of properties in the Users Guide.

@node HowWriteSTT, LexicalContext, WhatProperties, Top
@chapter How do I write an STT grammar?

You can write it in either the @dfn{native syntacs grammar format} (a
file with suffix @file{.stt}) or XML.  The best way to learn how to
write a grammar is by looking at examples.  The @file{grammar/}
directory in the distribution has some sample grammars.


